Practical notes on build process for test data:

run NormalizeOCR testnumberX
on the text files that are in /newfeatures/texts

I believe I have already eliminated most of the inappropriately included non-English vols; you can check badfiles/ or frenchvols/ for ringers. I also think I’ve fixed genremap pagination using deprecated/FixPagination.py. But these are potential problems to be aware of in subsequent iterations.

You will definitely need to run PageLevelWordCounter.py to generate a wordcounts file. You will also need to run MetadataFeatures in order to add metadata from MARC records to the pagefeatures.

*********

Most recent rebuild process:

I didn't have to mess with genremaps or exclude volumes. Just ran MultiNormalizeOCR. Didn't have to run MetadataFeatures because I have integrated that into the OCR. Did have to add back in the "shameful hack" in MultiNormalizeOCR that skips two extra "libra" pages at the end of the file.

*********

Even more recent rebuild processes (fifthfeatures, sixthfeatures)

I decided that I needed to literally use features from the pairtree on the cluster, because the text-cleaning process on the cluster had been different, and even though I was using the same feature-extraction process I was getting different results. The problem with this was that blank pages had also been inserted, so I had to write PgAligner.py and BetterAligner.py to realign the genre maps with the new pagination.

Fifthfeatures used crappy PgAligner.py. I suspect Sixthfeatures genremaps were produced with the BetterAligner.py. Seventhfeatures merged those with new training data using the fifty volumes I had tagged to assess out-of-sample accuracy, producing a new set of 370 volumes. I subsequently regenerated the pagefeatures in seventhfeatures, because the header upvoting was not helping in most cases. Restricted header upvoting to specialized terms that indicate genre.

*********

Creating a testset. I did this most recently by running production/Select2ndTestset.py on a slice of volumeIDs downloaded from the normalize dir on taub. This created newtestset.txt, which I uploaded to taub/python/pullpages. Given current settings on PathDictionary, "python3 PullTexts.py newtestset" pulls .norm.txt files into usesofscale/sampletexts. I then pulled those down into /newtest. At this point it's necessary to run newarffmaker.py in order to a) rename files by deleting the "norm" b) add an additional <pb>, and c) make an arff. Then you can load the arff into pagetaggerwithdependencies.jar.

*********

Creating 20cfeatures:

Pulled down 20ctexts and created /pagemaps as per above. Converted .tsv to map using production/makemaps.py. 

Features to add (from June, now out of date)

Count commas, periods, quotation marks, exclamation points & question marks

• Lines ending with punctuation other than a hyphen

• Lines where either of the last two characters is a number.

Mean of initial characters’ position in the alphabet, calculate distance from average mean, multiply that by number of lines, round to int, call it #alphabeticdeviation

• Group certain numbers as “pricenumber” if they contain £ or $ or ¢ or end with s or d.

• # of lines beginning with a personal name, or an alphabetic word not in dictionary, or (Sir, Mrs, Mr, Miss, Lady, Lord, Prince) (raw number of lines, don’t normalize)

• # of lines beginning with a capitalized word that ends with a period / total number of lines

• Maximum sequence of capitalized lines that are == or after the preceding capitalized line in the alphabet (Use both raw, and normalized by total number of capitalized lines).

Multiplied features

startwname * startwrubric

Ideas for the immediate future:

Produce a page-word table.

Confusion matrix, and
confusion matrix on words.

Inter-rater reliability -- at the page level, and on words.

Confusion matrix based on existing metadata!

Page alignment with Hathi seqs.

Solve the missing page in .norm.txt files

Train classifiers on *parts* of the corpus. I.e., what does the division between fiction and nonfiction look like *within* volumes we have identified as mostly-fiction. What about mostly-drama? Can we, at the mostly-drama level, activate the vdr and pdr tags?

LAB NOTEBOOK

Things I tried that didn’t immediately work:

Active learning didn’t seem to help. To be fair, I’ve only tried it with 18 vols. A larger trial is needed.

Co-training with 200 vols didn’t seem to help.

In both these cases it’s possible that I’m stretching the classifier by introducing real-world irregularities not present in the sample. In which case, these techniques could be helping more than they initially appear to. More testing is called for.

Creating a separate travel category didn’t seem to help. Folding it into autobiography didn’t seem to help. Separating autobiography from biography didn’t seem to help. In all of these cases, it’s possible that the training set is too small.

Training classifiers on chronological segments did not seem to improve accuracy. Training classifiers on sets of volumes known to be predominantly in certain genres did (cascade strategy). But the effect was small.

Using call numbers explicitly as features did not help. Inferring genre probabilities from call numbers and using those *probabilities* as features, also did not help. Explicit genre metadata in MARC records helped only in the case of fiction and biography. Drama and poetry were too rare to help.

SVM were not immediately better than logistic regression and were *very* slow to train at full size. Random Forests seemed to be a better complement.

Training a model to guide segmentation, CRF-wise, was not actually better than the ad-hoc rules I invented in Coalescer.py. Possibility remains that those ad-hoc rules are not good out of sample.

Deleted seven volumes that were in languages other than English and obvs couldn’t be classified.

Reclassified:

yale.39002085614858
The Harmony of Divine Attributes, 1815
mysteriously got classified as fiction; changed to non

umn.31951002281295l
Memoirs of a Hindu, 1883
got classified as biography, but is fiction

uc2.ark+=13960=t1mg7h137
The Wonder-Working Water Mill, 1791
got classified as nonfiction, but is fiction

loc.ark+=13960=t8z89rq3t
Sketches of Jewish Life in History, 1873
very trickily ambiguous, a lot of it is fictionalized history,
but the division in toc between “characteristic sketches” and “historical sketches” provided a guideline. Had to recharacterize the “characteristic sketches” as fiction; student had made them non. Historical sketches remained non. Classifier had caught this.

mdp.39015065785522
The Poetical Works of John Milton with Notes of Various Authors, 1824
Really, this is mostly nonfiction, with a few lines of verse on each page followed by copious notes. Students had classified as narrative poetry, verse drama, etc.; reclassified as all notes.

Ambiguities:

mdp.39015078550970
Life and Surprising Adventures of Robinson Crusoe with a Biographical Account of Defoe, 1844
Classifier goes back and forth between bio and fic throughout.

nyp.33433075921019
Dufief’s Nature Displayed in Her Mode of Teaching Language to Man
Alternating passages of English and Spanish conversation. Classified as nonfiction. Classifier thinks it’s drama.

mdp.39015023384137
Music and Lyrics from the Psalms
Classified as lyric; classifier thinks it’s nonfiction.

mdp.39015073766977
Travels and Adventures in Eastern Africa, 1836
Correctly classified as travel. Classifier goes back and forth between bio, fic, and non.

Defoe, Captain Singleton -- confused about whether it’s fiction or not.

Swift, Gulliver’s Travels -- confused about whether it’s fiction.

Biography written for children is often misclassified as fiction.

uc2.ark+=13960=t77s7k930
Dialogue Between Divers Eminent Persons of the Past and Present Age
It’s fiction, but the classifier thinks it’s nonfiction.

Index to Burns poems -- since it includes first lines, it tends to be interpreted as poetry.

Active learning:

Did an absolutely STUNNING job of identifying ambiguities in the collection. The #1 most uncertain volume was The Terrific Register; difficult to say whether this is historical fiction, true crime, or an almanac of bizzarerie.

The second most uncertain volume was Madagascar, or Robert Drury’s journal, which has been the subject of scholarly debate -- is it nonfiction or a fiction by Defoe?

The we get Chronicles of the Schönberg-Cotta Family, which is historical fiction, and Tremaine, which is a debate about free will and foreknowledge in the guise of fiction. In the latter case it’s really debatable whether this should be classified as fiction.

Also Thackeray’s Paris and Irish sketch-books, which are, again, deeply confusing generically.

Also Gough, “Platform Echoes,” a long argument for temperance illustrated by personal anecdotes and sketches. The line between this and, say, Tremaine is really blurry.

Paul Fyfe ‏@pfyfe  1h
@Ted_Underwood found these useful: M. Lauster's /Sketches of the C19th/ and A. Garcha /From Sketch to Novel

A place where I actually disagree with catalogers: Frances Elliot, _Old Court Life in France,_ usually listed as nonfiction, and characterized for some reason in MARC as “Bibliographies,” is to my eyes historical fiction.

Also “Chrismas Hours,” coded in controlfield 008 as not fiction is to my eyes fiction, though of a very didactic sort.